Data sources/transitions (#30)
ihmeuw/vivarium_research: docs/source/models/cause.rst

to as **incidence in the total population** (as estimated by the GBD study) 
and **incidence in the susceptible** (or *at-risk*) **population.** These 
measures are defined using the following key concepts:

  **Person-time:** person-time is a measure of the number of individuals 
  multiplied by the amount of time they individually occupy the population 
  of interest. Notably, the population of interest varies depending on context 
  and can be defined by age group, sex, location, time, disease status, etc.

    For example, if one individual is occupies the population of interest for 
    two years, they contribute two person-years. If another individual is in 
    our population of interest for 6 months, they contribute 0.5 person-years.
    Together, these two individuals contribute a total of 2.5 person-years.

  **Susceptible or At-Risk Population:** the susceptible population, also 
  referred to as the at-risk population, is defined as the population that *
  does not* have the condition of interest; in other words, the susceptible 
  population that is at risk of developing the condition. Notably, the number 

>   of individuals in this population will change overtime as the following 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  of individuals in this population will change over time as the following 
```

  events occur:

     - Members of the at-risk population develop the condition and are no longer susceptible
     - Members of the at-risk population die and are no longer susceptible 
     - Individuals are born or age into the at-risk population and become susceptible
     - Individuals age out of the at-risk population and are no longer susceptible
     - Individuals with the condition recover from the condition and re-enter the at-risk population as susceptible (in the case of conditions with remission)

**Total Population Incidence Rate** is estimated by the Global Burden of 
Disease Study by estimating the number of incident cases that occur in one 
year and scaling this value per 100,000 individuals of a specified population.

.. math::

  \frac{n_\text{incident cases}}{\text{person-time}_\text{total population}}

Because the denominator of this measure is not specific to a particular cause 
model state, it is **not** an appropriate data source for cause model 
transition rates between states. 

.. note:: 

  GBD estimates of total population incidence rate require transformation 
  prior to use as a cause model transition probability data source (see below 

>   for more detail).

Reviewer: This sounds a little too absolute to me. Do we **always** transform the data prior to use, or are there cases (e.g. if we don't have good prevalence data but we know the prevalence is small), where we would just use the total population incidence rate in the model as a close-enough approximation? @collijk , any input on this?

Also, saying that the GBD estimates of total population incidence rates are "not an appropriate data source" makes it sound like we can't use them and we'll have to get data somewhere else. But that's not true - we do use them, we just have to combine this estimate with a different estimate to get the number we want.  So perhaps changing the wording of that sentence would help.

Reviewer 2: For all the models we use now, we always perform the transformation.  That is up to y'all though.

Author: I will add some clarity to the language about how incidence as retrieved from GBD final results is not an appropriate data source **before** transformation to the at-risk population. 

Also, for context: as discussed with @collijk, our transformation is simply un-doing a transformation that GBD made to get incidence in the total population from an estimate of incidence in the susceptible population.

**Susceptible/At-Risk Population Incidence Rate** as discussed here is also 

> referred to as incidence density rate, person-time incidence rate, and in some 

Reviewer 2: Both this and the total population incidence rate are technically incidence density rates.  That term just means you have person-time in the denominator.

Reviewer: I think *incidence rate* and *incidence density rate* (or *incidence density*) are now essentially treated as synonyms. See e.g.:

http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/gerstman/hs161/pre-inc-key-points.PDF

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incidence_(epidemiology)

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/incidence-rate.asp

I like the sound of "incidence rate" better than the other two options for general use, but it is good that we note the alternative terminology. In fact, when we say "... and in some cases may simply be referred to as the incidence rate," it may be more accurate to say that *usually*, the term "incidence rate" means the measure that we are calling the "susceptible population incidence rate."

Also note that in the last item of the first link above, they say that at-risk person time can be approximated by *(average population) x (time interval)*. It looks like they mean "average total population," which means that using this measure in the denominator would actually compute what we are calling the "total population incidence rate" that the GBD uses. So perhaps this is a common way to estimate the susceptible incidence rate when total population is the only data available?

cases may simply be referred to as the incidence rate. It is defined as:

.. math::

  \frac{n_\text{incident cases}}{\text{person-time}_\text{susceptible population}}

Because the denominator for the susceptible population incidence rate is 

> person-time in the at-risk population, it can represent the probability of a 

Reviewer: I don't like the word "represent" here because the rate has dimensions of 1/time and is not the same thing as a probability, which is dimensionless (the rate is like a "probability density"). Rather, we can compute the probability if we know the rate (by integrating and then exponentiating). Here's a suggestion for different wording:

```suggestion
person-time in the at-risk population, this incidence rate can be used to compute the probability of a 
```

Reviewer: Or perhaps, "after scaling by time, the incidence rate can represent the probability...". I think we just have to be careful about glossing over the rate/probability distinction because the rates can be bigger than 1, whereas probabilities cannot. The rate can only be interpreted as a probability after multiplying it by a sufficiently small time step. For sufficiently small time steps, rate*time becomes a good estimate of the probability, but how small of a time step you need to get a good approximation depends on how large the rate is.

new case of the condition occuring in an individual without the condition in a 

> given time frame. Therefore, it can be used to represent the probability that 

Reviewer: Again, the rate is distinct from the probability:

```suggestion
given time frame. Therefore, it can be used to compute the probability that 
```

a simulant will transition from a susceptible to infected cause model state in 
a given timestep.

  For instance, consider an example in which the global susceptible population 
  incidence rate of injuries in 2017 was 6,800 cases per 100,000 person-years, 
  or 0.068 cases per person-year. In this example, 6,800 new injuries occurred 
  among 100,000 person-years of observation among the non-injured population.

  Now, consider a cause model with a susceptible (not injured) state and an 
  infected (injured) state with a simulation timestep of 1 year. In this case, 
  the probability that a simulant will transition from the susceptible to 
  infected state within a single timestep (i.e. the transition probability) 
  would be represented as 0.068.

  Notably, in order to represent the transition probability for a single 
  simulant within a single timestep, the cumulative incidence value needs to 
  be scaled so that the person-time denominator is equal to the simulation 
  timestep. Therefore, if the timestep of the cause model considered above 
  were six months instead of one year, the transition probability would be 

>   0.034 (0.034 cases per 0.5 person-years). 

Reviewer: As per my comments above, I think it would be good to clarify that these are approximations of the probability, which (I think) are valid because the rate is small enough.

I'm not sure the best way to reword this. Perhaps the current version is good enough for now, and we can think about how to edit it to make it more precise in a future iteration.

.. note::

  Because GBD estimates total population incidence rates, Vivarium 
  automatically transforms GBD results into susceptible population incidence 
  rates that can be used as an appropriate data source for cause model 
  transition probabilities. 

  This transformation from total population incidence rate to an approximation 

>   of the susceptible populatoin incidence rate is performed with the following 

Reviewer 3: population (sp)

move between cause model states. 

Incidence Rates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Generally, incidence is a measure of new cases of a given condition that occur 
in a given timeframe and population. The count value of new cases of the 
condition of interest will always be the numerator of incidence measures. The 
denominator of incidence measures is somewhat more complex and is critical to 
ensuring an accurate data source to inform cause model transition rates.

Incidence rates that are estimated by the Global Burden of Disease study are 
measures of *cumulative incidence.* Cumulative incidence is defined using the 
following concepts: 

.. todo: 

	insert formatted equation for: new cases of condition / person-time of at 
  risk population

**Person-time:** person-time is a measure of the number of individuals 
multiplied by the amount of time they individually occupy the population of 
interest.

	For example, if one individual is in our population of interest for two 
  years, they contribute two person-years. If another individual is in our 
  population of interest for 6 months, they contribute 0.5 person-years. 
  Together, these individuals contribute a total of 2.5 person-years.

> **At-risk population:** the at-risk population is defined as the population 

Author: Done in most recent commit!

Cause Model Transitions
+++++++++++++++++++++++

.. todo:

	- Add progression transitions, deterministic transitions, and severity splits to summary table above? (should this be the case? or should these only be discusse din the transition section? I am thinking the latter)
	- Enhance blurb to beginning of cause model transition section about how we use probabilies to inform cause model transitions (to come in next commits)
	- Detail incidence, remisison, and duration-based transition sections (to come in next commits)
	- Detail progression transitions, deterministic transitions, and severity splits (to come in future PRs)

Vivarium uses probabilities to make decisions about how and when simulants move between cause model states. 

Incidence Rates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Generally, incidence is a measure of new cases of a given condition that occur in a given timeframe and population. The count value of new cases of the condition of interest will always be the numerator of incidence measures. The denominator of incidence measures is somewhat more complex and is critical to ensuring an accurate data source to inform cause model transition rates.

> Incidence rates that are estimated by the Global Burden of Disease study are measures of *cumulative incidence.* Cumulative incidence is a defined as the following: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incidence rates that are estimated by the Global Burden of Disease study are measures of *cumulative incidence.* Cumulative incidence is a defined using the following concepts: 
```

> Incidence rates that are estimated by the Global Burden of Disease study are measures of *cumulative incidence.* Cumulative incidence is a defined using the following concepts: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incidence rates that are estimated by the Global Burden of Disease study are measures of *cumulative incidence.* Cumulative incidence is defined using the following concepts: 
```

.. todo: 

	insert formatted equation for: new cases of condition / person-time of at risk population

**Person-time:** person-time is a measure of the number of individuals multiplied by the amount of time they individually occupy the population of interest.

	For example, if one individual is in our population of interest for two years, they contribute two person-years. If another individual is in our population of interest for 6 months, they contribute 0.5 person-years. Together, these individuals contribute a total of 2.5 person-years.

**At-risk population:** the at-risk population is defined as the population that *does not* have the condition of interest; in other words, the susceptible population that is at risk of developing the condition. Notably, the number of individuals in this population will change overtime as the following events occur:

> 	- Members of the at-risk population develop of the condition and are no longer susceptible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Members of the at-risk population develop the condition and are no longer susceptible
```

	- Members of the at-risk population die and are no longer susceptible 
	- Individuals are born or age into the at-risk population and become susceptible

> 	- Individuals with the condition recover from the condition and re-enter the at-risk population as susceptible (in the case of conditions with remission)

Author: Do we think this is helpful? Or distracting/unnecessary?

Reviewer: I think it's helpful!

Reviewer: I think this is helpful

Cumulative incidence contrasts with other measures of incidence that may have different denominators. For instance, incidence rate may refer to new cases of a given condition that occur in a specified timeframe (e.g. 10 cases per year) or may refer to new cases per person-time of the general population rather than the at-risk population. Incidence measures other than cumulative with person-time of the at-risk population as the denominator are not appropriate for incidence data sources for cause model transition probabilities.

Because the denominator for cumulative incidence is person-time in the at-risk population, it can represent the probability of a new case of the condition occuring in an individual without the condition in a given time frame. Therefore, it can be used to represent the probability that a simulant will transition from a susceptible to infected cause model state in a given timestep.

> 	For instance, as reported by the GBD, the global incidence of injuries in 2017 was approximately 6,800 cases per 100,000 person-years, or 0.068 cases per person-year.

Reviewer: Do the GBD incidence measures mean person-years for the total population as opposed to the at-risk population? It would be good if we clarified this somewhere.

Reviewer: If so, then in the example of injuries below, we're approximating at-risk person-years by total person-years, which should be valid because the injury rate is low. Is that correct?

Author: This is addressed in most recent commit - thanks for the feedback!

	Consider a cause model with a susceptible (not injured) state and an infected (injured) state with a simulation timestep of 1 year. In this case, the probability that a simulant will transition from the susceptible to infected state within a single timestep (i.e. the transition probability) would be represented as 0.068.

> 	Notably, in order to represent the transition probability for a single simulant within a single timestep, the cumulative incidence value needs to be scaled so that the person-time denominator is equal to the simulation timestep. Therefore, if the timestep of the cause model considered above were six months instead of one year, the transition probability would be 0.34 (0.34 cases per 0.5 person-years). 

Reviewer 4: 0.034 not 0.34, IIUC

Author: Yes, thank you! I fixed this in a new commit

Cause Model Transitions
+++++++++++++++++++++++

.. todo::

	#. Add progression transitions, deterministic transitions, and severity splits to summary table above? (should this be the case? or should these only be discusse din the transition section? I am thinking the latter)
	#. Enhance blurb to beginning of cause model transition section about how we use probabilies to inform cause model transitions (to come in next commits)
	#. Detail incidence, remisison, and duration-based transition sections (to come in next commits)
	#. Detail progression transitions, deterministic transitions, and severity splits (to come in future PRs)

Vivarium uses probabilities to make decisions about how and when simulants 
move between cause model states. 

Incidence Rates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Generally, incidence is a measure of new cases of a given condition that occur 
in a given timeframe and population. The count value of new cases of the 
condition of interest will always be the numerator of incidence measures. The 
denominator of incidence measures is somewhat more complex and is critical to 
ensuring an accurate data source to inform cause model transition rates. 

> **Cumulative incidence** is a specific type of incidence measure that can be 

Reviewer: Aha! I figured out the relationship between the incidence rate and the hazard rate function, using the observation that the person-time of the at-risk population is the initial population times the area under the survival function curve, and the fact that the hazard function h(t) = -S'(t) / S(t).

Namely, I think the standard definition of incidence rate is (incident cases) / (person-time of at-risk population), and the following are equivalent characterizations:

incidence rate over an interval [t_1, t_2]
= (incident cases in [t_1 ,t_2]) / (person-time of at-risk population during [t_1, t_2])
= (decrease in S(t) from t_1 to t_2) / (area under S(t) from t_1 to t_2)
= - (S(t_2) - S(t_1)) / ((average fraction of population at risk during [t_1, t_2]) * (t_2 - t_1))
= (average rate of decrease of at-risk population) / (average at-risk population during [t_1, t_2])
= (integral of h(t)*S(t) from t_1 to t_2) / (integral of S(t) from t_1 to t_2)
= population-weighted average of h(t) on the interval [t_1, t_2]

In particular, the incidence rate is **not** equal to what I called lambda_t above (the unweighted average of h(t) on [t_1, t_2]), unless the hazard rate is constant.

I think these two different averages should have the following interpretations (but I haven't thought about it carefully):

- The unweighted average hazard rate should be the constant hazard rate that results in the same decrease in S(t) over the interval [t_1, t_2] if you started with equal at-risk populations.

- The population-weighted hazard rate (i.e. the incidence rate) should be the constant hazard rate that results in the same decrease in S(t) over the interval [t_1, t_2] if the two at-risk populations had the same person-time during the interval.

Anyway, not all of this should go on the page about incidence rates, but some of it should go on the page about survival analysis.

> **Cumulative incidence** is a specific type of incidence measure that can be 

Author: In the most recent commits, I changed "cumulative incidence" to what we discussed as "total population incidence rate" and "susceptible population incidence rate". So far, I have focused on defining what these are and how they may be used in our model.

I am planning to get into how the susceptible population incidence rate and hazard rate relate in the limitation section (currently just a to-do still on this page) and in the linked survival analysis page.

Let me know if you think more of the information from these comments belongs in the existing text of this PR instead of the to-do limitation and survival analysis sections and I can work on adding it in. Otherwise, this will be helpful moving forward onto those sections, so thank you!

used to represent cause model transition probabilities. Cumulative incidence 
is defined using the following concepts: 

.. math::

>   CumulativeIncidence = \frac{n_{incident cases}}{persontime_{atrisk}}

Author: I updated the formula formatting in the most recent commit - thanks!

  infected (injured) state with a simulation timestep of 1 year. In this case, 
  the probability that a simulant will transition from the susceptible to 
  infected state within a single timestep (i.e. the transition probability) 
  would be represented as 0.068.

  Notably, in order to represent the transition probability for a single 
  simulant within a single timestep, the cumulative incidence value needs to 
  be scaled so that the person-time denominator is equal to the simulation 
  timestep. Therefore, if the timestep of the cause model considered above 
  were six months instead of one year, the transition probability would be 
  0.034 (0.034 cases per 0.5 person-years). 

Cumulative incidence contrasts with other measures of incidence that may have 
different denominators. For instance, incidence rate may refer to new cases of 
a given condition that occur in a specified timeframe (e.g. 10 cases per year) 
or may refer to new cases per person-time of the general population rather 
than the at-risk population. Incidence measures other than cumulative with 
person-time of the at-risk population as the denominator are not appropriate 

> for incidence data sources for cause model transition probabilities.

Reviewer: Again, change cumulative incidence to (average) incidence rate.

Ideally, I would like some context about when these different measures of rates are appropriate.

For example, why does GBD use total population person-time rather than at-risk person-time when reporting incidence?

Author: Interesting... I am not exactly sure, but my guess is that incidence/total_pop is a more relevant measure for policy discussions than incidence/susceptible_pop. Incidence/total_pop allows for a quick measure of "what percent of my country's population will develop the disease this year". With incidence/susceptible_pop, a quick calculation (including condition prevalence) would be necessary to figure out that number.

Do you think this would be worth discussing in this section?

Reviewer: Hmm, yes, I think it would be worth putting in a sentence or two explaining what GBD does and why, especially given this comment from below:

> Also, for context: as discussed with @collijk, our transformation is simply un-doing a transformation that GBD made to get incidence in the total population from an estimate of incidence in the susceptible population.

It looks like the todo mentions this, so perhaps we can add something in a future version.
